The market reactions make perfect sense
to me and that's what we've been calling
for and the simple reason is Venezuela's
oil was going to only one buyer China
and from the middle of 2024
to December China has already bought
almost 300 million barrels of oil.
That's the amount of oil if US puts in
the SPR it will get to fill from its
current level SPR level of 400. So if
there were many buyers and they don't
get the Venezuelan oil and they have to
go for alternate oil then the oil prices
react only one buyer who has already
bought a lot this was expected this was
priced in.
>> What do you think the US meant by
running Venezuela? I mean in in terms of
oil supplies I mean essentially are they
going to decide who who pumps the oil
for example? I mean in terms of you know
really getting production back I mean
how difficult would would it actually
look?
>> You asked a very good question and I
think the answer is probably less in the
politics of it but more in the chemistry
of oil and my answer is that one there
is lot of hype around I I saw the
previous person greatest oil reserves at
300 billion barrels. That is wrong.
Those are paper barrels. uh in somewhere
2008 or so when the oil prices touch 150
near dollars per barrel the Venezuelan
then president uh just increased the
numbers because a lot of the heavy oil
this oil is twice as heavy as the normal
Middle Eastern barrels. So at that very
high price they proved that this we have
a lot more oil at the current prices.
These are paper reserves and probably
the reserves are probably less than or
near 100 million barrels. So that's one
point and the second point is that this
oil is so heavy to produce and the
number of refineries in the US and
elsewhere is declining. Who wants this
kind of an oil? uh we already know Saudi
Arabia in the recent times cancelled a 1
million barrels per day heavy crude oil
project Safania so this is not the oil
what the world needs in future as we go
where we need less gasoline less diesel
so I guess a lot of hot talk lot of I
guess uh you know wrong analysis
happening and that's I wanted to just
call out
>> okay well that's that's that's why we we
got you on to help us understand the nu
ones. It's almost like me saying I I
should have been the Olympic gold medal
sprinter if only I trained u every day
of my life since I was born. But but but
but help help me understand this then.
So in the meantime though, so the
Venezuelans have stepped back as far as
supply is concerned and really that
filled that gap, the group that's filled
that gap are some of the heavy oil
producers out of Canada. Do I look at
that group as potentially if all goes to
plan as perhaps the potential losers
here, the Canadians?
Uh good question again David. I think
you gave a very good analogy. I think
that that you you did a better job than
me. Now in terms of Canada there are no
tariffs and since these hot discussions
have taken place between Canada and US.
Canada has only lost about half a
million barrels of oil and that barrel
of oil has gone to China. There is
probably a limit to what China will buy
more because China has already bought a
huge amount of Iranian heavy barrels.
China has already bought huge amount of
Venezuelan barrels. So China is kind of
the vacuum cleaner of the oil markets
for quite some time and oil bank for
these sanctioned countries. So there is
there won't be a very significant
appetite for Canada. So I would say in
short term Canada is probably not a
winner but what Canada is probably doing
is the right thing creating some
optionality so that they just don't
depend on the US. But overall I believe
the heavy oil producers are not going to
be winners. The winners will be in the
Middle Eastern mediums barrels.
>> I see. Um you mentioned about China. I
mean so do you see any sort of impact
this takeover by the US on big oil
buyers like China then?
>> No impact is my answer. And my answer is
simple. Um everybody in China prepared
very well for this scenario. uh from the
middle of 2024 as as I mentioned China
has January was buying around 100 KBD
uh,000 barrels per day China jacked it
up now the January arrivals are at 900
and there is huge amount of floating oil
veneal oil also around China so I would
say China is well stocked up on these
kind of heavy barrels so no impact on
China is my answer
>> final question for you then how Does
this since it seems the conversations
keeps going back to the Middle East,
might this affect how the other big oil
producers um decide how they turn on or
turn off supply?
>> So I think uh the number of amount of
barrels we are talking about which
Venezuela was exporting to China is
about 900. In my view the entire uh this
situation is only a US China conflict is
nothing to do with pro possibly the
reserves in Venezuela and then you
rightly point out then the OPEC. So if
we lose some of these barrels in the
market uh then OPEC does have some
opportunity and OPEC has opportunity
simply because of the right quality of
the barrels they hold. Even the US shale
which is a lighter barrel and getting
lighter is also not the right quality.
So I would say more than the volumes for
the OPEC player the quality is on their
side and that's where they will continue
to calibrate. And one more point very
important point which often gets missed
is that uh Middle Eastern OPEC players
are not just crude producers they are
build big refineries. They are big
product producers. They pump a lot of
oil products to the market. So when they
cut crude oil, they pump products. When
they want to bring the crude, they cut
the products. Perfect system of
calibration. And that is one big reason
why we don't see oil prices go very
volatile in these geopolitical times
because OPEC runs with two pedals of
crude and product. And it it does a good
job at it.
M
>> well, real quickly, you you wrote a
report recently about the China's oil
market influence and you call it market
chess that 2025
>> uh China changed oil markets in a very
significant way.
>> Can you explain a little bit more about
and what what does that mean for 2026
for China?
>> So, let me talk give you a 2026 view
first and then I'll go and explain the
25. The 2026 picture is that uh China
has probably planned a lot better in
terms of stocking the barrels. China is
also doing a significant shift in their
refinery portfolio. China used to make
almost 38% diesel yield but China has
reduced that diesel lead to about 27%.
uh China is converting a lot of the
diesel into NAPA and why so because
China used to buy a lot of the
prochemical feed stocks from the US and
with the tariffs that got affected. So
China is updating reoptimizing its
entire refining portfolio in I would say
a way which people are not uh fully
accounting for and that is giving China
the strength and that's what China did
in the recent sort of the years. So 2026
means China is changing the technology.
China is optimizing the refinary
footprint portfolio and China I would
say is also uh focusing a lot more on
the joint ventures with the Middle
Eastern players. So they have the
security of supply. So I would say China
in my view is very strong, very well
prepared, ahead of everybody probably in
the world in terms of managing the oil
markets and they are the reasons why the
the oil prices neither tanks neither
probably goes very high. So China is
some ways giving some stability to the
oil markets
>> and that will continue.
>> Great to have you. Thanks for time.